Good day I'm Norman Wildberger in today's video
we want to connect this problem that we're having
with unique factorization of Zant with the
original understanding of Euclid this is after
all a result that goes back more than 2,000
years that every natural number n is uniquely
factorizable into primes yet we have seen a lot of
evidence for this claim that the number is n which
is ten tribal ten plus twenty three cannot in
fact be factored into primes so we have a logical
conundrum here that we want to somehow resolve
or point out like where is actually the problem
but first let's actually solidify this claim and
just make sure that we really believe that this
is very very plausible fact so what do we know so
far about that well we have established at least
some viewers have established that we have certain
interesting prime factors 313 139 163 80,000 301
400,000 109 and this number two seven nine nine 73
73 these are all prime factors of Zed and then of
course there's some remaining quotient let's call
it W and the natural question is what can we say
about this W this quotient that we get when we
take our numbers N and we divided by these few
prime factors that we have found okay so let's
proceed here in a number of steps let's sort of
start with the simplest case if we just look at
one over three have this first prime factor here
and think about dividing that by three now
then is equal to one plus a huge number of
zeros and then a two three at the end so when we
divide that by anything it's a lot like taking 1
over that thing that we're dividing by this we're
effectively dividing one by whatever if we ignore
that little two and three that are far at the end
of this sequence so it was the first approximation
we can think about one over three that's of
course the repeating decimal three repeated
one over three times thirteen that's one over
thirty-nine that has a repeating cycle of point
zero two five six for one the next one three times
thirteen times one over thirty nine the reciprocal
of that is one over 5421 has a decimal expansion
that begins like this zero zero zero and then one
eight four four six seven eight one zero three six
seven zero nine and then it kind of carries on in
some fashion or another but how does it carry on
that's an interesting question so correspondingly
if we take Zed and we just divide by the first
three factors that we expect to get a decimal
number very huge one which at least begins with
a one eight four four six seven eight and so on
and then it's subsequent digits have a lot to do
with the reciprocal of this number here all right
so let's try to get some understanding of what
it means when we divide that by three times 13
times 139 so we're going to look at this problem
of one over this number M then the Phi function
of M the owner totient function is one less than
this times one less than this times one less than
this because this is a product of primes and so
the euler totient function is the product of the
euler totient function of each one of those and
each one of those the euler totient function is
just one less than it because it is a prime so
this thing turns out to be 3312 which has this
factorization and this is important for us in it
that it determines the the order of this group
U of M and it's in this group U of M that that
powers of ten are playing themselves out and it's
the order of ten in this group which determines
the length of this repeated cycle in the decimal
expansion of one over m so to find that order
let's have a look tend to various factors or
divisors of this five am first of all we can
check using our computer that if we take ten
to this full power that we do mod M again one
that's a statement of euler's theorem because M
which is this number here and the number ten are
relatively prime they have no common factors so
ten to the five M should be congruent to 1 mod
M ok so that's one possible exponent that will
give us one but we're interested in what's the
smallest such possible exposure that gives us
one so what we can do is try different factors we
get for example say remove that 23 and see what
happens if we take 10 to the 2 to the fourth times
3 squared mod M we get 2 5 3 6 which is not equal
to 1 okay so that's not gonna work but how about
reducing the power of 3 from 3 squared 2 3 well
that turns out to give us 1 but if we reduce it
one further by just removing the three altogether
then we don't get 1 so we can reduce the 3 from
3 squared to just 3 and what about reducing the
power of 2 well if we take 2 squared we get 1 if
we take just 2 we get 1 but if we drop the 2 all
together we get something that's not equal to 1
so the smallest exponent that we can use which is
a factor of this will be 2 times 3 times 23 which
is 138 and this way we established that the order
of 10 in the group U of M is 138 and that's also
telling us that the length of the repeated cycle
in the expansion of 1 over m will have length 138
so what actually does happen well if we look at
the reciprocal of 1 over 3 times 13 times 139
our computer can actually expand that out to me
thousands of digits no problem and by looking at
that we can write down the decimal expansion up
to the place where it starts to repeat find that
place where it repeats sorry about here then we
have one eight four four six seven eight one and
so on and then if we count the number of digits
in this cycle we find that there's exactly
one hundred thirty eight of them as we've
predicted by that calculation in the group you
will then so this is telling us what actually
the quotient said divided by three times 13 times
139 looks like as a decimal number or as a numeral
starting from the left okay so it starts like
this and then here it will repeat another 138
exactly the same sequence and then another 138
exactly the same sequence and so on and so forth
so it'll just keep on repeating that all the
way to the end almost to the end at the very
end something a little bit different happens
because the cycle might not to go through an
exact sequence and we also have to take care of
the 23 that distinguishes a Z from a pure power
of 10 so I'll leave it to you as an interesting
exercise to figure out how many such repeating
cycles are there in the expansion of Z over this
how many of these repeating cycles are there and
what does this last cycle look like which is
a little bit different from the other ones so
we see that the quotient is pretty complicated
but it's not you know beyond understanding but
there's a fair amount of complexity contained in
this cycle of 138 you need that much information
to sort of encode it as well as these additional
information of how many of these things there are
and what that's the last cycle o'clock so it's a
little bit complicated but not out of the question
to sort of get your head around it look what
happens when we up the number of primes okay
so let's take the product of all the primes up
so far we know divides it let's call this M now
so it's the product of all of these primes that
we've talked about then Phi of M is going to be
the product of one less than each one of these
primes and that turned out to be this number here
with factorization given like this so we can now
ask well what is the length of the repeating cycle
if we take 1 over m it will also have a repeating
cycle and how long is that repeating cycle well
that's a little bit more subtle now because
the problem is a little bit more complicated
but it's essentially the same idea we're going
to look for the order of 10 in U of M in other
words we're going to ask ourselves what power
of 10 do we need to get something congruent to
1 mod M now our computer can actually deal with
this very efficiently so if we take 10 to this
whole number mod M we are going to get 1 but
what we can do is we can start dropping some
or more of these prime factors we can say try
removing this one and seeing if we still get
something congruent to 1 or we could start maybe
removing one of these powers maybe dropping from
23 squared to just 23 or from 5 squared 2 5 or
maybe even remove the 5s all together so by a
systematic search basically looking 1 Prime at a
time and seeing how far down you can go with that
1 Prime and then putting all that information
together you can check that the order of 10 is
this thing here so it's 2 squared 3 to the fourth
5 squared 13 23 61 4 3 4 9 and 5 3 8 4 1 1 so a
couple of the primes get reduced and the other
ones stay where they are and this product then
is this number here which is about 3 6 9 12 15
18 digits long just roughly 10 to the 17 3 times
10 to the 17 that is the length of the repeated
cycle when you take one over this number here
okay so the length of the cycle it's the number
of digits in the cycle that you have to go before
things repeat so it's more than a thousands
millions billions trillions quadrillions okay
how far the cycle extends before it repeats and
so that means that when you take the quotient
of Z by this M that W that you have well it
turns out that it starts like this five five
two zero two nine eight five one nine zero
and then it carries on for about of three
hundred quadrillion digits before it repeats
again so to specify that quotient to specify
that quotient to write it out so we know exactly
what it it is requires a huge amount of data okay
because there's this number of digits in this
W before it starts to repeat you can see that
this is already overwhelming our our hard drives
no way we can deal with this in terms of storing
all this stuff and you can see that it's gotten
a lot more complicated than it did when we just
had three primes and you can imagine that if we
added a few more Prime's or maybe a hundred more
Prime's or maybe a million more Prime's this is
going to blow up on us completely completely go to
overwhelm us we don't have to go that far before
it'd be completely unworkable to understand what
this quotient is okay so then the difficulties
with factoring huge number likes it are at least
two fold that we've seen first of all there is the
obvious problem of finding Prime's that divide it
because the number is so big it's very you know
onerous finding a prime actually divides it but
even once we have some primes that divide it we're
seeing that the quotients that we get dividing the
big number by the primes that we have so far
found and getting a smaller quotient it's not
the case that the problem is getting simpler
because although these quotients are in fact
getting smaller they are getting more complicated
they are more complex their complexity is getting
bigger so the complexity is increasing even as
these quotients become smaller that's exactly
what we've been Illustrated with this division
process that we've been looking at here right the
complexity of the quotients goes up and this
is something that's not seen at the level of
medium ordinary level factorization if you have a
number of three hundred digits and you're trying
to factorize it and you find out a prime and then
you divide well great now your new quotient is a
little bit smaller instead of three hundred digits
maybe it's two hundred and forty nine digits okay
so with every prime that you find you're happy
because the quotient is getting smaller here yes
the quotient is getting smaller but that's not the
crucial point the point is that the complexity is
going up and it's not going up just you know
in a small way it's going up pretty quickly
we saw that there's a huge difference between
just taking the first three Prime's and taking
those six or seven Prime's that we had right the
complexity went instead of having a cycle of 138
we had a cycle of three hundred quadrillion huge
difference so of course eventually what happens is
that the complexity just overwhelms you because
you get blown out of the known universe at some
point this number is going to be so big that
you can't write it down in the known universe
you are at sea so the reality is that it really is
impossible to fully factorize into primes almost
surely the complexity of this problem overwhelms
the possible complexity inherent in our universe
okay we're positing a mathematical problem whose
complexity Dwarfs the ability of the universe to
encode a solution that's just the way it is okay
this is just the the reality of the world it has
nothing to do with our computers exactly although
it may appear to but it's really a problem about
the world ultimately it's not really a problem
is just a fact about the world you can write
down these ridiculously big numbers and in fact
we've seen that said is not so ridiculously big
right we've seen a lot bigger numbers in Zed so
what I'm saying now about Zen applies even more
so for all those other gigantic numbers that we've
been exploring in some of our previous videos so
was Euclid wrong Euclid clearly stated that every
number has a unique factorization into primes and
now I hope I've convinced you that the number
Z does not have such a unique factorization so
there's a problem somewhere perhaps Euclid was
wrong but I claim that no he was not in fact
the problem is really with modern times it's
we that have the problem not Euclid and this
very important point very interesting point
that I want to share with you we have to go
back a little bit and recognize that the ancient
Greeks had a different approach to numbers than
we do very different approach because they were
solidly grounded in a geometrical understanding
of things mathematics to them was primarily
geometrical the number theory was built on the
geometry so Euclidean books five to ten of the
elements he deals with magnitudes and relations
between them but for him magnitudes are typically
things associated with measurements involving say
lengths or areas or volumes so to him a number
was really more measurement of something rather
than a counting of something which is not to say
that the counting aspect didn't play a role it
certainly did and in fact it had a lot to do with
this idea of proportion that if we have a segment
like this in a segment like this then we can talk
about the proportion between them when we say the
proportion of their lengths but in fact he just
thought geometrically that you could divide this
thing up into three segments and you could divide
this thing up into four segments so that all those
segments were equal and then you could say that
the ratio of A to B or the proportion of A to
B was three to four so has something to do with
subdivision it wasn't really a counting process in
fact it wasn't even a measurement process exactly
it's not as if you got a ruler and measured this
and measured that it was more a finding of a
commencer ability finding a unit that both objects
could be subdivided into so very different kind
of approach to numbers and that really explains
why that he was not wrong about his statement
about a unique factorization in book five he
makes a definition that sort of illustrates or
shows what kind of ID he has about the relative
sizes of numbers he says that magnitudes are said
to have a ratio to one another which are capable
when multiplied of exceeding one another this is
a translation of the--the book five so what does
he mean here well suppose we have a segment a
and another segment B and we're interested in
comparing them so how does one compare segments
and what doesn't actually have a ruler well
what one can do is one can take one segment and
multiply it by a factor and let me show you how
he might do this so here is a segment a and I've
kind of copied it down here okay so you can can
do that and then if we take a straight edge it
doesn't have to be a ruler just a straightedge
and I sort of make a little mind maybe maybe it's
all right there all right so I want to duplicate
this thing or I want to multiply it one way
I can do that is by taking some other line
and duplicating finding a a equally spaced set of
points on some other line once I have that then I
can draw parallel lines from the Givens equally
spaced line to this new line so I draw this one
and then I draw another line parallel to it and
another line parallel to that and another parallel
to that okay and then you clean we'll know that
this is also a and this is also a and this is
also a and then maybe this thing here is a little
bit less than that so he could say that B is less
than 4 times a so we're exhibiting the idea that
contained in this definition that we require the
segment's to have the property that we can take
any segment and multiply it by a suitable number
in this case 4 to get something which is bigger
than the other segment in this case it's sort
of obvious that you just take one of B and you
get something bigger than a so any two segments
that we're considering have to have a property
that you can at least approximately estimate
one as a multiple of the other or bound one by a
multiple of the other so we can see the huge gap
that separates us and the ancient Greeks when it
comes to thinking about numbers Euclid would have
looked at one of our big numbers and said show
me the line construct that thing geometrically
then I can understand what you're talking about so
he thinks primarily geometrically and so a number
is really just some kind of abstraction that's
ultimately pinned down to a physical geometrical
object typically a line but maybe a rectangle
or some three-dimensional thing also and it
has to be constructed or exhibited geometrically
essentially physically before it can be properly
considered and here's the problem that it is
impossible to exhibit both 1 and as segments
or lives so Euclid does not have an absolute
measurement when you're talking about lines in
the plane there's no canonical unit you have to
specify a segment and say let's agree that this
is one and then once you've done that well then
you can think about some other segment as being
given by a number so if this is one then maybe
this is you know 10 maybe this is 23 or something
or maybe 23 and a half or something like that but
it's required to actually write down the line and
the problem is there's no way of writing down
two segments one of which is a unit segment one
and another which is a segment representing ten
triangle 10 plus 23 we'd either have to make the
segment involving one incredibly infinitesimally
small so we couldn't actually create it or we have
to create this one essentially infinitely
long essentially to be able to exhibit it
so you could would have said the game that you
people are playing by these clever tricks taking
Exponential's of Exponential's of Exponential's
and so on and just you know saying look here's a
number is an empty game because it's not connected
to physical geometrical reality now I'm not sure
if you would have said it exactly that way but I
think that's in the spirit of the way the ancient
Greeks thought and so there's no problem for
Euclid in the fact that this thing does not
have a unique factorization who cares it's not a
kind of number that he's considering anyway so his
theory is fine it's our theory which has a problem
I think the conclusion that we are heading towards
here is that of our various number systems the one
that's really closest to the spirit of the ancient
Greeks to Euclid is that of GNAT the primitive
natural numbers where we're talking just about
a em set of multi Santos strokes because this
is somehow just a discrete version of what you
get when you take a segment and you think of
the segment as being a whole bunch of little
units strung together this step-by-step process
of creating a natural number is I think just the
discrete version of the continuous process of
creating a line segment so one unit at time to
go there here then you go little further and
then call them furthering a little further the
two things are really a very parallel in this way
the essential inductive nature of natural numbers
is built into arithmetic so when we were talking
about natural numbers this way well we know that
natural numbers are built up one step at a time
from well the empty set or the number one because
that's directly what the natural number looks like
and how it's been built in the same kind of way
that a segment of Euclid is built up in a very
natural direct kind of way starting with a unit
so if we restrict ourselves to just primitive
natural numbers then our difficulties with
numbers like Zed disappear because then is no
longer part of the story of primitive natural
number arithmetic it's just way too big and so the
theorem of unique factorization into primes holds
we recover the familiar arithmetic at the price of
scaling down our expectations and so the domain in
which we're agreeing to work in we're restricting
ourselves to something that's more sensible and
controlled and reasonable doesn't have all
kinds of things going off and all kinds of
crazy outer the universe directions okay and this
way the kind of logic of Euclid is reflected in a
logic of arithmetic so I think we're leading
to the conclusion that not is somehow really
the fundamental arena in which arithmetic really
truly takes place and what about num hindu-arabic
numerals well those are pretty close to natural
numbers it's certainly bigger but there's a close
proximity we're also assuming when we talk about
hindu-arabic numeral that you're actually able to
write it all down and so I think it's reasonable
for us at least to hope or to aspire to extending
the arithmetic which is solid for net also to numb
but that probably does require some additional
thinking and some additional work it's not an
automatic thing it's not an automatic thing so
we have a new conception of number here we have a
new kind of orientation to what a natural number
is and a natural question is how do we extend
that to integers this is very very interesting
question we're going to start tackling that next
time and you're gonna see remarkably that modern
20th century physics is going to play a very
big role in orienting us in the direction of
what our negative numbers hope you'll join me for
that i am Norman Wildberger thanks for listening